---
layout: post
author: Eric Miranda
tags: [c, client, server]
---

I remember one of the first times I truly understood something in my comp sci studies - finding out what a client / server actually meant.

Up until then, I had used high level frameworks like [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/); my idea of servers being some complicated networked program serving all types of files and text, magically responding to client web requests.
Come one day in my OS class, I see a server implemented in plain ol' Java.

Click! I was amazed at the simplicity of this overloaded term, server.

# Let's go lower
Now, ~3 years later, [inspired by this amazing video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFqNMp22JIE), I felt the urge to understand client
/ server networking at a deeper, lower level. I'm talking C! A language I haven't 
touched in quite a while, but always drawn to, for whatever reasons.

## A server
We start off by creating a file, `server.c`
```bash
vim server.c
```
Scaffolding, with some comments on the process we'll follow
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <netinet/in.h>
#include <netinet/ip.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

int main()
{
  // 1. init some necessary data structures

  // 2. grab ourselves a socket

  // 3. bind

  // 4. listen

  // 5. accept

  // 6. respond

  // 7. close

  return 0;
}
```

So, what's a socket ?  
Drawing on wikipedia
> A (network) socket is a **software structure** within a networked node (essentially a computer)
that serves as a point for receiving data  
\- *don't quote me on this*

The text in bold gives us an idea of what a socket really is. Some further googling will tell you
that a socket is just a file - inline with [the unix philosophy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everything_is_a_file).

## 1. Data Structures
Let's skip this for now

## 2. Creating a socket
We here love `man`, not google.
> int socket(int domain, int type, int protocol)  
\- *man 7 ip*

**Return type**
- `int socket(...` the return type is an integer, the lowest number signifying an available file descriptor for the process. I find that [this article](https://guide.bash.academy/inception/?=So_what_exactly_is_a_program_and_how_does_it_connect_to_other_programs?#h2.3) explains FDs really well, btw

**Parameters**
- `int domain` the "communication domain". There are different types of sockets
depending on whether we're communicating between processes (IPC) or networks. In our case, network, the domain is AF_INET - just an int constant that's understood by the kernel to be a network socket
- `int type` the communication type, which could be [connection-oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connection-oriented_communication) or [connectionless](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connectionless_communication). In our case, connection-oriented, the type is `SOCK_STREAM` - once again, an int constant understood by the kernel
- `int protocol` the protocol used (TCP, UDP etc) In our case there exists only one
protocol with a connection-oriented type within the network domain, and that's TCP. As per `man 7 ip`, we can pass 0 here and the kernel would understand

Code time!
```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
  // 1. init some necessary data structures

  // 2. grab ourselves a socket
  int sfd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

  // ...
}
```
*After writing the socket function call, I couldn't help but notice how arguments and return values were simply just `int`. Coming from high level languages, I'm used to complicated, data-stuffed objects returned and passed in left right and center!*

## 3. Bind
We now have a socket file descriptor, but what good is that? When we visit a link in the browser,
we enter an IP address (ultimately, thanks DNS). So how will the kernel know to route the data coming in on a specific network interface to our socket file?

That's where `bind()` comes in.
```c
int bind(int sockfd, const struct sockaddr *addr, socklen_t addrlen);
```

**Return type**
- `int bind(...` yet again, a lovely `int` constant â¤ï¸  0 is returned on success, -1 on failure

**Parameters**
- `int sockfd` the socket file descriptor
- `const struct sockaddr *addr` ah, we finally come to (1), the data structure. On to that soon...
- `socklen_t addrlen` simply the size of the above data structure, in bytes

## 1. (Back to) Data Structures
Little on sockets, first. A socket is uniquely identified by a interface IP address and a port number[^1]. The data structure that contains this information is, you guessed it, `struct sockaddr`

```c
// typedefs

struct sockaddr_in {
   sa_family_t    sin_family; /* address family: AF_INET */
   in_port_t      sin_port;   /* port in network byte order */
   struct in_addr sin_addr;   /* internet address (ip) */
};

/* Internet address (ip) */
struct in_addr {
   uint32_t       s_addr;     /* address in network byte order */
};
```
It's all pretty self-explanatory, except for the network byte order. Using the network byte order, we ensure that our network
stack can remain architecture agnostic (by only using [big endian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness) byte order).

We can achieve network order using library functions, `htons()` & `htonl()`
```c
int main()
{
  // 1. init some necessary data structures
    struct in_addr ip_address = {0}; // effectively 0.0.0.0, i.e, listen on all interfaces
    const struct sockaddr_in sock_addr = {0}; // zeroize the struct's memory
    sock_addr.sin_family = AF_INET;
    sock_addr.sin_port = htons(8999);
    sock_addr.in_addr = ip_address;

  // ..
```

Great that we've got that sorted. Moving back to the bind call, we can now do
```c
  // 3. bind
  int bind_error = bind(sfd, &sock_addr, sizeof(sock_addr));
  if (0 != bind_error)
  {
    perror("Shucks, couldn't bind. Is the port in use ?");
    return bind_error;
  }
  
  // ...
```

## 4. Listen
A socket truly receives data only when it's [listening](https://youtu.be/tj7uvAystUY), so let's talk about that

```c
int listen(int sockfd, int backlog)
```

**Return Type**
- `int listen(...` same as bind (and sever other programs in general) - 0 on success, -1 on failure

**Parameters**
- `int backlog` seems like the kernel [ignores this value anyway](https://stackoverflow.com/a/10749670) so we'll set it to 0

Let's add it to our code
```c
  // 4. listen
  int listen_error = listen(sfd, 0);
  if (0 != listen_error)
  {
    perror("I'm listening to another process. Not you");
    return bind_error;
  }
```

## 5. Accept
Like we've seen before, TCP is **connection** oriented. This means that every new client trying to connect
to our server must be `accept()`ed by us first!
```c
int accept(int sockfd, struct sockaddr *addr, socklen_t *addrlen);
```

**Return type**
- `int accept(...` returns a new socket file descriptor number, especially for dealing with the particular connecting client. -1 on error

**Parameters**
- `struct sockaddr *addr` a structure similar to the one in the bind call, except that it contains the
client address details. We'll set it to `NULL`, as we don't need it in our basic example
- `socklen_t *addrlen` length of the previous data structure, in our case `NULL`

```c
  // 5. accept 
  int cfd = accept(sfd, NULL, NULL);
  if (0 > cfd)
  {
    perror("I won't accept you for who you are");
    return cfd;
  }
```

## 6. Respond
Finally, tangible communication with the client! Let's send him a hello ðŸ‘‹.

To really dig it in that a socket is just a file, we'll use the `write` system call instead of `send`
which is normally used in network programming. There's probably some RED_FLAGS here, but we'll ignore
them in the spirit of pedagogy

```c
ssize_t write(int fd, const void *buf, size_t count);
```
**Return type**
- `ssize_t write(...` on success, the number of bytes written. -1 on failure
- `int fd` not the usual sfd, but again, it's just a file descriptor ultimately. Note that we specify our client sfd here
- `const void *buf` a pointer to our buffer, which is a fancy term for something that contains our
message
- `size_t count` the number of bytes to be read from buffer. Remember that by default we don't have
an in-band signal for the end of the buffer (in our case, some memory containing a string). So we tell the system call to only read `count`
bytes in order to avoid [buffer overflow attacks](https://www.imperva.com/learn/application-security/buffer-overflow/)

```c
  // 6. respond
  char *message = "Hi there";
  ssize_t bytes_sent = write(cfd, message, strlen(message));

  // finally close the socket file
  if (0 > close(cfd))
  {
    perror("Couldn't close !\n");
  }

```

## 7. Close
The `close()` system call, used on files
```c
  // close
  if (0 > close(sfd))
  {
    perror("Couldn't close !\n");
  }
```

## The end
And that's it! But these last few steps, particularly (5) and (6), got me wondering, do we create
a new connection for every HTTP request? It turns out, kinda[^2]

A client in c is implemented similarly (and "easily-er"), so in the interest of time (it's a 10 minute read already), we'll skip over the code. But the way you'd do it is
1. create a socket with `socket()`
2. connect to a socket with `connect()`, passing in the server IP:PORT details
3. receive a message from the server using `recv()`, passing in a buffer

## Wait I wanna see it in action
Ok! Instead of writing our own client, we'll use a handy command-line network tool called `netcat`

In one terminal, run
```bash
gcc server.c && ./a.out
```
In another, let's start a client!
```bash
nc 0.0.0.0 8999
```
And you'll see a beautiful "Hi there"

Phew! I think I've developed an interest for network programming. I still have
that naggy feeling (or fear) of not knowing what's happening at the protocol level (I'm talking TCP/IP stack baby).

My brother once suggested I implement the stack on some cheap board. Maybe I'll do that sometime :)

---
#### Amazing refs
1. [A nice historic overview of socket implementations](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14388706/how-do-so-reuseaddr-and-so-reuseport-differ)

---
#### Footnotes
{: data-content="footnotes"}

[^1]: [Well, not quite](https://stackoverflow.com/a/152863)
[^2]: [We're a bit more advanced now](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20764180)
